---
title: Resiliency Through Diversity
date: "2019-10-01"
excerpt: "Diverse ecosystems are more resilient to stress and disturbance when compared with homogeneous ecosystems. This basic principle of ecology, that diversity leads to strength within a system, should be applied to the wildlife profession."
image: "https://source.unsplash.com/TRhGEGdw-YY/1280x800"
author: Brian Wakeling
--- 

*The Nevada TWS board contributed to this article*

Diverse ecosystems are more resilient to stress and disturbance when compared with homogeneous ecosystems. This basic principle of ecology, that diversity leads to strength within a system, should be applied to the wildlife profession. Solving the overwhelming mix of management, scientific, and political challenges facing wildlife professionals requires a combination of creativity, intelligence, and perseverance – attributes that increase as the ethnic, cultural, gender, and economic diversity (human diversity) of a group increases. 

In July, the Nevada Chapter sponsored a Conservation Conversation intended to explore attitudes about our ability to enact diversity in the workplace, the barriers to diversification, and perspectives of our chapter membership regarding our progress. Although these perspectives were shared honestly, they certainly do not capture every aspect of the issue. 

Research supports diversity as a strength. While we recognize this in ecological systems, how well are we diversifying the historically Caucasian and generally male (particularly in leadership positions) wildlife workforce? How can we achieve diversity in the wildlife profession? We identified several barriers to achieving a diverse workforce that include: 1) a lack of public awareness and interest (human dimensions research demonstrate ethnic differences exist in interest regarding conservation, but is that a result of other bias in how we treat ethnic or economic classes?) about the wildlife profession, 2) the cost or inherent bias of our education system, 3) internal, unrecognized biases which lead to recruiting or hiring others that think like us, 4) low wages, and 5) a lack of focused sincerity in our efforts to address diversity. 

In general, wildlife professionals do not seem to harbor many biases on the surface, yet we may be unaware of our own inherent prejudices. Our biases, and our lack of diversity, may be in part due to unintentional efforts to surround ourselves with people that think like we do. For instance, we may hire people that share a common vision. Is this a flaw in our thinking? Hunters tend to admire agencies like the National Park Service when they hire avid hunters. Do those that oppose hunting feel better if a game management agency hires someone opposed to hunting? How do our biases effect our workforce diversity? Based on human dimensions research published in the 2018 report "America's Wildlife Values: The Social Context of Wildlife Management in the U.S," we know that a greater proportion of the public is shifting towards mutualistic views (that is, a view that wildlife have rights similar to those of humans) in the treatment of wildlife. Despite that shift, the same research also shows that every state wildlife agency employs predominately individuals with traditionalist views (that is, wildlife are subordinate and should be used in ways that benefit humans). 

Most state wildlife agencies, including Nevada, have robust outreach programs aimed at increasing interest in wildlife, especially increasing hunter and angler participation. Coordinating outreach efforts to raise awareness of professional opportunities in high school students and early college students would help increase public awareness of our profession, particularly aiming to reach students from underrepresented groups. 
Do our educational efforts create bias themselves? As we seek individuals that respect and further the work we have done, do we insert bias? A professor mentoring teaching assistants in the early 1980s at Arizona State University read from the congressional record on the intended role of educators: Education was not designed to teach students what to think, but how to think. How good are we at fulfilling that role? 

Even if our education was perfect, our ability to afford advanced education can create bias. Admittedly, more people are seeking education beyond high school than ever before, but the cost of that education can be staggering and leave a student in substantial debt for decades to come. Student loans cannot be discharged through bankruptcy. Does this cost create an economic bias? Are we excluding those that might benefit the wildlife profession because they cannot afford to attend universities? 

Human dimensions research shows us that we see nature and wildlife differently depending on our background. There is a definite ethnic difference in how we perceive nature, which may be based on our economic stature or historical familial relationships or some other aspect that we can't yet identify. We know that outreach activities to encourage participation in outdoor activities needs to be tailored to reach a diverse audience. If we tailor messages to reach our diverse publics to encourage participation in this field of science as a source of employment, do we change our biases in that we are now seeking particular aspects of diversity, perhaps disproportionately? 

A wildlife professional with another state agency once stated that he believed that the United States excelled on the world stage, not because of our natural resources, but because of our diversity and acceptance of it. We involve all cultures, races, ethnicities, religions, sexual orientations, and educational levels in our industries and politics. Our innovation is not hampered by a single set of values that everyone must adhere to, but rather we allow any value that fosters our collective interests to progress. We generally don't care who writes our computer programs, advances medical science, builds our roads, flies our aircraft, or any of a thousand other things that comes to mind. We care if it works. We care if it is kind. We care if it is responsible. 

It can be difficult to attract diverse candidates to wildlife management careers. The jobs are not tremendously high-paying, and years of volunteer work and education is needed even to get an interview. This suggests that some level of affluence is necessary for the candidate or the candidate's family to be able to exist until a steady job may be found. Does this create an economic bias in hiring? 

An unfortunate filtering of early career wildlife professionals begins immediately following, or even before, graduation. Have you ever read or applied for an entry-level job announcement that sounds like this? "No pay or health insurance, housing (tent) included, must have a degree and one year of radio-telemetry experience, your own car and GIS experience, venomous animals and hazardous conditions daily, good attitude a must." The targeted demographic for this announcement is a narrow, privileged group that includes individuals without student loans, or an adequate support system, who can afford to take on debt to gain critical experience. If we want to diversify the economic backgrounds represented within our profession, livable wages and job stability at all levels is important, especially for technicians, interns, and other early career professionals. The restriction of our early career applicant pool will lead to a limited hiring pool and a perpetuation of an economically similar workforce. 

It appears then that bias is diverse itself. Bias and lack of diversity may be racial, ethnic, economic, educational, or activity related. It could be gender based, based on sexual orientation, or influenced by religious factors. While some bias is intentional, we must also recognize that there is much bias and prejudice that is so insidious that we don't even recognize it. We are a diverse nation, are we getting better at accepting diversity? Wildlifers are an adept, creative, and passionate group. Every day we track the untrackable and catch the uncatchable. Yet, do we then truly embrace diversity? It is a challenge to find people that support our vision of conservation. It is a bigger challenge to choose them when they support it in a way that differs from ours. 
When we look in the rear-view mirror, we can see the progress we have made supporting diversity. Our ranks and our leadership are diversifying, yet it is slow – too slow. We have further to go. 
