---
title: Message from the President - 2019
date: "2019-12-01"
excerpt: "Since this is the first newsletter published since I began my term as Kevin Shoemaker President of the Nevada Chapter of The Wildlife Society (in January 2019), I first want to take this opportunity to introduce myself."
image: "https://source.unsplash.com/PrtEkmgK0uo/1200x800"
author: Kevin Shoemaker
---

Since this is the first newsletter published since I began my term as Kevin Shoemaker President of the Nevada Chapter of The Wildlife Society (in January 2019), I first want to take this opportunity to introduce myself. I’m about to enter my fourth year in the Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Science at UNR, where I conduct conservation- focused research and teach quantitative approaches for studying and managing wild populations. I love my job for many reasons, not the least of which is being able to interact every day with many wonderful colleagues and students who are dedicated to studying and protecting our natural world. Before I joined the faculty at UNR, I received an MS and PhD in Conservation Biology from The State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry (Syracuse, NY) and served as a postdoctoral scholar at Stony Brook University. Outside of work I enjoy playing music with friends (I also sing with community-based performing groups) and spending as much time camping and hiking as I can (which isn’t much!). 

Next, I’d like to express my deep appreciation and gratitude for the work of our Past President, Brian Wakeling. Brian’s leadership and vision brought about the ‘Conservation Conversation’ series, much-improved Chapter bylaws, and several opportunities to host and support influential workshops and symposia focused on local wildlife conservation and management. Moreover, he fostered and maintained an active and engaged Board and chaired efficient and enjoyable monthly board meetings (no small feat!). The ‘Conservation Conversations’, where local wildlife and natural resource professionals come together to socialize, enjoy good food (and refreshing beverages!) and discuss key topics relevant to our field, were a particularly successful (and fun!) addition to our Chapter’s events calendar. Brian’s many contributions ultimately resulted in our Chapter being named the 2019 Chapter of the Year by TWS Western Section. If I can continue all the great momentum that Brian set in place, I’ll consider my tenure as President a success! 

A year ago at our very first ‘Conservation Conversation’, we discussed the value of workplace diversity and how we could help to foster diversity in the wildlife profession. I bring this up here because the value of the diverse backgrounds and perspectives in our Executive Board became delightfully clear at the most recent meeting of our Executive Board. One of our Board members had voiced serious concerns about a letter we were drafting to send to policymakers and stakeholder groups (voicing concerns regarding the proposed military withdrawal of land from the Desert National Wildlife Refuge). After an extensive and wide-ranging discussion, we were able to come to agreement on a set of key points, and the unique professional background of the dissenting Board member ultimately paved the way for a more focused and impactful letter (which will be published in our next newsletter). In his recent book “Trusting Judgements”, Conservation Biologist Mark Burgman presents data suggesting that the intelligence of groups is generally far higher than any individual member, and I have to believe that diversity is the underlying reason. Let’s continue to strive to surround ourselves with diversity and celebrate our differences of opinion! 

This year we are continuing the Conservation Conversation tradition. On Aug 3 we hosted a picnic and BBQ at Rancho San Rafael park (Highland pavilion, 4-7pm) where our discussion topic was Wildlife Management vs. Wildlife Conservation: Is there a fundamental difference? Should there be? Full disclosure: this event is still in the future at the time of this writing, and we will provide a summary of the discussion in our next newsletter. Topics we expect to discuss include differences between TWS and the Society for Conservation Biology, differences between managing game species vs. non- game species, and cultural and historical differences between Conservation Biologists and ‘Wildlifers’. Regardless, we will enjoy consuming burgers, drinking cold (non-alcoholic!) beverages and socializing with other members. Thanks in advance to all who participated!

As we have done in the past, the Chapter intends to offer financial support to up to three students or young professionals to attend the annual TWS meeting, to be held here in Reno. Details, including application dates, can be found in this newsletter, along with a calendar of other events that includes the Nevada Chapter Science Symposium. We hope this calendar will help you to plan and engage with the Chapter throughout the year. 

Speaking of the TWS/AFS meeting in Reno, the Chapter is a supporter or sponsor for several symposia at the meeting, including "Landscape-scale planning and conservation of wetland resources for wildlife and ecological resilience", organized by Matt Grabau (USFWS) and former Chapter President John Tull, a panel entitled “Recovering America’s Wildlife Act: Critical Legislation to Provide Funding for Wildlife Management and Habitat Restoration” highlighting RAWA and its implications for state wildlife agencies and wildlife conservation in general, and a symposium entitled “Are free-ranging equids good for the west?” organized by Terry Messmer (Utah State) and our own president-elect, Cody Schroeder. Finally, we will be hosting a “Friends of Nevada” meet-and-greet reception as part of the TWS/AFS meeting, which will start at 7:30pm in the Peppermill resort. I hope to see many of you there! 

Finally, I’d like to thank the entire Executive Board for taking time out of their busy schedules to participate in monthly board meetings, plan events (like our Conservation Conversations), write letters, and generally keep this organization vibrant and relevant. Speaking of which, we are always looking for more people to get involved in the NV Chapter, from joining a committee (the Conservation Affairs committee is a great place to start!) to writing articles for our next newsletter to joining us at an upcoming Conservation Conversation, to bringing a local wildlife-related issue to our attention. I look forward to hearing from you! 
