---
title: America's Wildlife Values and Animal Welfare
date: "2020-01-12"
excerpt: "Wildlife Values are important. Everyone's voice should be heard. We need to use science to inform our discussions and our decisions. These are not easy tasks when put together, but it is the challenge our society faces today."
image: "/static/images/20170821-lizard.jpg"
author: Brian Wakeling
---

America's Wildlife Values are the core values we develop at an early age, regarding how we relate to wildlife and animals in general.  Classic "traditionalists" view animals in a utilitarian sense, whereas "mutualists" see animals with rights similar to humans.  "Pluralists" combines both viewpoints such that even anthropomorphic traits given to animals do not limit the use of the animal for utilitarian purposes.  A classic traditionalist maybe a hunter or livestock producer.  A mutualist may be a wildlife viewer that gives names to favorite animals and ascribes human intent to observed actions.  Mutualists are not usually hunters, but some do hunt.  A "pluralist" view may best be illustrated by the common Native American view of wildlife – animals have spiritual resonance, often with names and roles, but are harvested and consumed for food and clothing.  Although an animal may be killed, pluralists respect their rights equal to our own.  The "distanced" view, the most disturbing classification to any nature lover, tends to not value or consider wildlife in their daily lives.  There is no "right" wildlife value orientation, although it is not uncommon for someone that holds a particular viewpoint to strongly disagree with someone that holds a different one.  As a hunter, I self-identify as either a traditionalist or pluralist. 

Wildlife Values are important to wildlife conservation because they are tied to the development of our conservation model.  In the United States and Canada, overexploitation of our natural resources for monetary gain – unregulated market hunting for food and feathers for hats, timber deforestation, and unrestricted grazing – created the catastrophe that was narrowly averted primarily but individuals that hunted.  In the late 1800s and early 1900s, very few people lived a lifestyle that cultivated mutualism.  Our natural resources were held very lightly in the public trust, and they were exploited without care or regulation by individuals that may have been distanced from the very resources they exploited.  The conservation model that developed was supported and funded by traditionalists, and wildlife recovered dramatically from the dismal situation at the turn of the twentieth century. 

I sometimes struggle with the shifts we know are occurring in the proportion of America's Wildlife Values within our nation because the shifts have implications affecting wildlife conservation and what I believe to be important.  Conservation funding is important to me professional, and I enjoy harvesting and preparing my own food personally.  The proportion of distanced individuals remains largely unchanged in today's society when compared with 20 years ago, there have been significant shifts in the proportion of traditionalists (fewer today) and mutualists (more today).  Today, mutualists comprise a larger proportion of the nation and Nevada than do traditionalists or pluralists.  This is not universally true, and rural areas still tend to have more traditionalists than do urban areas.  I want to emphatically state that mutualists are not bad people – they simply look at wildlife differently than I do.  Most mutualists support regulated hunting, but they may have no interest in participating.  Because wildlife is managed in the public trust, everyone's voice is important.  Each individual can play a role in the selection of our public trustees – our elected officials and their appointees – but decisions are made by those who show up.  Everyone's voice, regardless of Wildlife Value orientation, is as important as mine. 

My struggle is in understanding why the shift is occurring.  My belief is that shifts from traditionalism or pluralism toward mutualism is likely due to the separation our urban lifestyle provides from the acquisition of food, shelter, and clothing.  If we value wildlife and the animals we choose to domesticate, then we want to ensure that their welfare is considered.  I appreciate this perspective.  I spent more on out-of-pocket health care for one of my dogs last year than I did on myself!  Extreme viewpoints of traditionalists (no concern for pain and suffering of an animal) are unacceptable to much of society.  Similarly, I have concerns about extreme viewpoints of those that would shield wildlife and other animals from any human influence.  I believe active management is needed to maintain the health of rangeland, forest communities, and wildlife populations.  I consume primarily wild animals for food (as well as some domestic livestock), and they must die for this to be possible.  I am personally involved in killing a sentient being for food.  If you eat domestically produced meat, you may not be the one doing the killing, but someone else is taking that life for you to eat. 

From a consumptive standpoint, I still have animal welfare concerns when I hunt.  I try to ensure that any kill is quick and humane.  I try to hunt in an ethical fashion by following regulations and fair chase standards.  There is not an oath that hunters take to avoid harm (there actually isn't one that doctors take either, as making an incision, drawing blood, or taking a biopsy all involve some level of harm).  Yet most hunters I know make a clean, humane kill a priority.  Any wound or injury these hunters might inflict results in anxiety and unease.  By comparison, "natural" deaths for wildlife can be far more painful, lengthy, and inhumane than most deaths inflicted by hunters.  This is not an effective argument with those that oppose hunting. 

Animal welfare is an important consideration to most people.  While it is important to most, it is not the same for everyone.  For me, animal welfare involves limiting harm, providing supportive care when appropriate, and allows for humane kills.  I concern myself with the welfare of the herd over the welfare of an individual animal.  I am willing to invest more in the welfare of a human than in the welfare of an animal.  I do not want to permit or inflict unnecessary pain or suffering.  I believe these are some defining traits for traditional-pluralists. 

If we don't kill the animal ourselves, can we positively influence animal welfare?  Domestic livestock are ubiquitous and visions of animals contentedly grazing upon green meadows are commonplace.  Yet this pastoral vision is largely inaccurate.  When the death of most livestock occurs, it is quick, humane, and heavily regulated.  Is the life of these livestock better than that of wildlife?  Rangeland life is quickly followed by gathering and loading into truck for transportation to a feed yard.  Antibiotics and commercials feeds are used to increase weight and improve health prior to commercial slaughter.  Contrast this with the life and death of a deer harvested by a hunter. Deer live their entire life in habitats largely undisturbed by humans – surviving as it has evolved. Deer aren’t given commercial feed or antibiotics to maintain health. I cannot deny the importance of economically provisioned (fiscally efficient) high-quality food for human consumption.  Wildlife that I have personally harvested is leaner and free of antibiotics and additives.  In my opinion, the life lived by a deer seems preferable to that lived by a cow. 

As humans, our diet and lifestyle are conscious choices.  Many individuals choose to avoid animal proteins in their diet and avoid animal products in their clothing.  If we are careful and we live our lives deliberately, can we avoid inflicting harm?  I would argue that even this is imperfect.  If we cultivate a field, we will alter a habitat that once supported wildlife.  This is no less true if we cultivate food for our own consumption rather than for domestic livestock to consume.  If we compete with wildlife for existing food, we limit the number of animals that may be sustained by that food source.  What do we use while eating (e.g., straws and single use containers), and then throw away?  There is no life that we can live that does not influence other lives on this planet, including those of wildlife.  These choices, however, certainly limit the degree of our influence. 

Consumption of animal protein is a personal choice. 

Hunting provides a lean, organic, pesticide-free source of protein from animals that have lived in a natural environment throughout their lives.  Most hunters have a desire to reduce discomfort for the animals that they kill – they have an interest in animal welfare.  The interest in animal welfare influences ethical choices in adopting fair chase tactics as well as precision and humaneness in the taking of that life.  This is the internal debate that most hunters have.  The ethical use, the fair treatment, limiting stress, injury, and pain, making a clean kill, limiting your effective range, and reducing or eliminating unfair advantages on an animal; you can eliminate death.  Accidents and injuries occur when hunters make mistakes, yet wildlife get injured even when humans never leave their home.  There exist no old folks' homes for rabbits. 

For us to live, other animals must die.  This is true if we choose to hunt or not, regardless of our dietary choices.  I believe our distance from natural ecosystems influence how we view this.  I believe it influences how we view overstocked ranges with overabundant grazing wildlife in National Parks, overabundant trees in wilderness areas, or free roaming equids.  I believe our closeness to nature when we are young is what defines our core values regarding wildlife throughout our life. If we do not recognize our connections to the natural world, our expectations may not be realistic.  I believe it is possible to be genuinely concerned with animal welfare yet be involved with the taking of an animal's life.  

Wildlife Values are important.  Everyone's voice should be heard.  We need to be able to clearly articulate how we want our natural environment to function before we begin meddling (or as Stephen Covey put it, begin with the end in mind!).  We need to use science to inform our discussions and our decisions.  These are not easy tasks when put together, but it is the challenge our society faces today. 

 